[Music]
Hello and welcome to another episode of No Such Thing as a Fish, a weekly podcast coming to
you from the QI offices in Covent Garden. My name is Dan Shriver, I am sitting here with
Andrew Hunter Murray, James Harkin and Anna Tyshinski and once again we have gathered around the
microphones with our four favorite facts from the last seven days and in a particular order here
we go. Starting with fact number one and that is my fact, my fact this week is that not long
after Benjamin Franklin invented the lightning rod it took off as a fashion. A lightning rod's
very tall metal objects. Yeah and very sexy when combined. You could dance around them.
Now this was in Paris in 1778. If you were walking the streets of Paris you would have seen
women with lightning rod hats so this is a hat that would have a sort of protruding rod. As far as
I can see in the drawings of the time they might dress that up a bit with a bit of sort of floral
stuff going around it. Yeah something to disguise it but what you didn't really disguise was the
big chain that came out of the hat that ran to the ground so that should you be struck by
lightning you could then ground the lightning via this big chain. Umbrellas did it as well so you
had umbrella with a giant lightning rod on top. How long do these women tend to survive
during thunderstorms? We don't know. The interesting thing is like was there any use for it do you
think? Do you think they deliberately had them to try and get the lightning away from them?
It's just for fashion. Well I think you know if it functioned as it was meant to then yeah
absolutely. They wanted it to function definitely. No hang on if you were hit by lightning wearing
one of these rods which it would ground it to the ground it's just I think it should work it just
that it would probably be too close to you. You'd die. You would die. If your hat had this and then
you had a Faraday cage all the way around you then that would save you. I've seen the pictures
and they didn't. No. Maybe your sedan chair was a Faraday sedan chair and then you're laughing.
I gotta say I empathize more and more with the French Revolution hearing what was going on in
Paris in the 1780s you know I think yeah that's pretty extravagant outlandish stuff. I don't
think this was to do with Franklin by the way but I think it was his specifically the French
Benjamin Franklin it was his translator who then turned it so he was a guy who was a botanist,
a physician and he was called Jacques and then he has two French names off of that.
Babur de Bourg. Yeah that'll do. Yeah looks good to me. Jacques Babur de Bourg and he was a
physician. Are you gonna do the rest of the book? Because he was the guy who translated all
Franklin's stuff into French didn't he? Yeah and because he was friends with Franklin he was also
supposed to go to America and then be kind of you know helping the revolution in a way but he
never went because no one liked him. Oh really? Well like he asked the Americans do you want my
help and they said we're okay. Well they were between a couple of different people and he was
really brash and people weren't really sure about him so he never got to do that. That is mad. Well
but thank god because otherwise you might not design this umbrella. Yeah and the UK might have
still owned America and well on that the America project thing I have a fact about George the
Third related to this and Benjamin Franklin because they had a disagreement about lightning rods.
Guess who was right? George the Third or Benjamin Franklin considering the scientific backgrounds
of the two guys. So one of them famously mad. One of them one of the greatest scientists who's
ever lived. And a fashionable guy. I guess you wouldn't be asking us if it wasn't the
exactly. George the Third was right in their disagreement so Franklin thought that lightning
rods should be incredibly sharp tipped at the top. Sharp tops. George the Third said no I want blunt
ones and he fitted the pallets with blunt ones and he was right they are more effective at
earthing lightning. Okay. For the reason that the field above blunt rods is stronger and I think
that means it intercepts lightning more. It helps to draw the lightning down. So actually I didn't
know that lightning rods were to stop lightning happening. Not the secondary purpose initially
was to ground it but the primary purpose according to Franklin and his people was
stop it happening by this sharp rod attracting this charge so dissipating it before it all
built up in the cloud. But it turns out that it's just not nearly big enough a field so it
doesn't really matter. So yeah George the Third was right you can have a knob. A door knob.
So another thing about the bulbous versus the spike right is that basically because Benjamin
Franklin was you know one of the signatories of the declaration of independence he was like a real
patriot and he invented the lightning rod. Basically this was a symbol of the new country
and so Britain did not like this upstart having its new symbol and that was another reason why
George the Third said that you had to put a knob on every single lightning rod in the entire empire.
Do you think it was a bit of a sly you know Franklin such a knob kind of gesture? Almost
certainly. Really? Yeah definitely that kind of work. That's a George the Third move. Yeah.
Can I tell you something about Benjamin Franklin getting in trouble for inventing the lightning
rod? So there was an earthquake at Cape Anne which is off the coast of Massachusetts and it was
soon after the lightning rod was invented and the pastor who was there was called Reverend Thomas
Prince and he said the earthquake happened because everyone's been putting up lightning rods.
Basically man has been thwarting God by trying to you know harness the lightning or channel it
so God has reacted by sending an earthquake. Well his idea was since God can't send down
lightning bolts to kill us anymore he's going to have to go from below instead. Exactly and it's
like you don't you're not showing much faith in your God you'll be able to do that wherever he likes.
People were very anti weren't they because of that you know you're trying to prevent God from
doing his work if he wants to strike you with lightning he should strike you with lightning
and there was a big push among scientists to try and convert people to it. There was a guy in
Germany called Johann Jakob Hemmer and he was a big lightning rod advocate in Germany this is in
the 18th century and he designed like a cross-shaped one which you can still see on the Mannheim Palace
and he had it so that each bit of the cross was detachable so that whenever lightning struck any
bit of the cross and caused a bit of damage he would then detach it bring it down to the masses
and put it on display to say look the lightning struck this and damaged it but it didn't damage
the building so it must work. That's clever because what people thought was that like Andy said that
maybe God was sending down lightning bolts to punish people but the problem is the tallest
building in most towns was a church whereby the brothels were quite like that and so if anything
got struck by lightning it usually was a church and the brothels usually got away scot-free so no
one could really explain what the problem was. The church's thing was an issue there's another
reason why it's good the lightning rod was invented because the way they repelled lightning before
the rod was to ring loads of church bells and so being a bell ringer was an extremely dangerous
job and that you know they were often hit by lightning they I think many of them used to die
because you'd be sent up to the church tower to ring the bell when there was a storm yeah when
you're most likely to get hit and there was actually in 1769 there was a church in Brescia
which was storing a hundred tons of gunpowder in its vaults for safekeeping and it got struck
by lightning because of the church spire and it blew up a sixth of the city three thousand people
died. Oh my god I know. Unbelievable. It started raining quite hard outside from where we're sitting.
And then you've got a massive spike coming out of your head. It's all the fashion darling.
The church bells they had written on them or you know inscribed on them the words fulgra frango
meaning I chase lightning. And the idea I think was that demons would kind of send down the
bolts like God would send the demons and the bells would scare them away. Yeah we have actually
mentioned them before. How interesting though that they would go and ring the bells during the
storms because in my head the wind was kind of doing that anyway. Oh yeah. Like I would always
have thought this. Maybe those big church bells aren't too worried by wind so much. Yeah yeah yeah.
So you can't get a good rhythm going maybe. The wind's very bad at getting exactly getting the right
beats. You can't get a canterbury, peeled, vicar, pleasure going. Whatever the first canterbury
pleasure that's a that's a bell ringing thing. Is it? The first canterbury pleasure just sounds
like a porn film based around the art of canterbury. That's why I didn't say it. Oh really? That's why
I didn't say it because I thought it sounds too weird but I think it's a question from the very
earliest QI episodes. I was thinking it was what the wife of BAFTA did. Yeah. I read that they were
all saying this. If I can't do jokes from the 14th century what jokes can I do? In the age
where lightning rods were becoming fashionable and people were skeptical there was one really famous
trial and this was in 1783 in France and it was a guy who'd installed a lightning rod on his house.
He was like an early adopter. The first person to get an iPhone in the village and the villagers
didn't like it. They said you know that's God's not going to like that. We didn't like it. We
don't believe it works and the alderman told him to remove it and he hired a lawyer and took the
alderman to court saying I'm allowed to keep my lightning rod and they won the case and he was
allowed to keep it and his lawyer was Maximilien Robespierre. The sort of one of the leading figures
in the French Revolution. Responsible for a lot of heads getting chopped up. Lots. Yeah and he made
his name in this case as the standout lawyer. This was 1783 but he didn't electrocute and he
actually saved maybe a lot of lives by defending this guy's lightning rod to compensate for the
head chopping off. But you're saying he was like a planning dispute lawyer. Everyone's
got to start somewhere. Yeah absolutely. He also loved physics. Like he was a science. He was like
one of these you know men of the century and he really liked science. They called him the barometer
when he was younger because he was so good at science. That's a cool name. I presumably knew
what the weather was going to be like. Always under pressure. Always under pressure. I got
another cool nickname for someone so barometer. Benjamin Franklin's grandson. Do you know he was
called? The the the thermometer. Lightning Rod Jr. was his name. Okay. Lightning Rod Jr. Not his real
name. His nickname. His grandson right. Yeah. Okay. You would think it would be Lightning Rod the
third. Maybe his dad didn't want the Lightning Rod nickname and said you know what let's just hold
this my son. Yes. That's cool. Do we know why? Just do you like Lightning Rods? No no no. He was
I think he was a journalist. I think he ran a magazine or a newspaper. I think possibly the
nickname was a bit of a slur on him. But I am I am just riffing off. Because he attracted controversy.
I like that. Could be. I like that. Because he always used to sit on the top of people's houses.
Yeah. So he had a knob on his head.
Okay. It's time for fact number two and that is Andy. My fact is that every time the UK delays a
decision on expanding Heathrow, the head of Skipple Airport in the Netherlands sends Heathrow a
congratulatory cake to thank them for all the extra custom. Ouch. I love the way you
pronounced Heathrow two different ways. Heathrow and then Heathrow. Heathrow. It's Heathrow,
isn't it? It's Heathrow. I was so worried about how to pronounce Skipple. I forgot how to pronounce
Heathrow. This was reported in 2016 and so Skipple is the the main Dutch airport. It's huge. It's
really really massive. Yeah. And Heathrow has been having a debate for about 70 80 years about
whether it's it's it's insane how long this debate's been going on. And so the third runway.
The third runway. Yeah, exactly. And so Skipple keeps sending them cakes. I find this very funny
and they said it was to congratulate Heathrow with the positive advice of the Airports Commission
on London. Heathrow's third runway. It's sarcastic. It's a sarcasm cake basically that they're
sending. What kind of cake is it? Do we know? Well, they showed a photo of the last one they sent
and it was one of those. It was a slightly fancy, you know, a coffee cake. It looked like a flower,
like a lake. If you were looking aerial shot over a flower, it was very beautiful.
Like a flower, like a beautiful, it looked like a cake, you know. It was a different kind of cake.
Yeah, it was very pretty. Is there any chance we keep delaying this Heathrow runway decision because
the people that Heathrow love this cake so much? It's very possible. It wouldn't make much less
sense than anything else. But they've been doing it for years. In 2016, this year of this article,
Heathrow finally sent their own cake back because of the approval of the third runway. So they said,
thanks for letting us borrow your runway, Amsterdam. We shouldn't need it much longer.
And then the cake's on the way. Six years ago. That's hubris, I'm afraid.
We haven't quite said this, I don't think, but the reason that they're sending them this cake is
because of the lack of this third runway. It means that the planes have to pit stop on a bigger
journey at this airport. So they're bringing them business. Is that right? Do they? Okay,
because I didn't know that. I just thought it was maybe people couldn't go to Heathrow,
so they were going to Amsterdam instead. But that's not right. It's a bit of both, basically.
It's just, it's a capacity thing. Heathrow uses about 99% of its all available capacity, which
sounds great. But actually, if there was more space, there would be more flights going through
there. So, yeah, so that is definitely advantage for them. Yeah, skiphole. It comes from a word
meaning shiphole. That's what it comes from. It's a real shiphole. Well, the reason it was called
shiphole is because it used to be in the water, skiphole. In fact, there was a sea battle there
in 1573, where the airport is today. And that's because it's all reclaimed land. They basically,
they wanted more land. Obviously, it's the Netherlands. There's lots of kind of, a lot of
the area is below sea level. So they created this massive steam engine, and they sucked all of the
water away to give them loads more land. And it was the largest steam engine of all time when it
was built. Oh, that's awesome. The SUP dry the airport. It was named after a guy called Nicholas
Creek. Okay. And it was called the Kwee engine. And they didn't drain the lake for the airport,
did they? They just drain the lake to reclaim the land. To reclaim the land, and it became
later on the airport. It's a really old airport. It's been used for civilian aircraft since 1920,
which is very old. And because of that reclaim thing that James just said, the runways are 11 feet
below sea level. So cool. When the airline KLM, so that's the Dutch national carrier,
isn't it, some flagship one, when they turned 100 years old in 2019, it was given a really cool salute,
the KLM flight arriving in Edinburgh. Have you seen this before? It's when a plane arrives
for a special occasion, it gets a water cannon salute. Oh, yeah, yeah. And it means that so
airports have these huge, powerful water cannons that it's like fire engines, basically, or water
jets. And they fire them in an arc over the plane as it's arriving. That feels dangerous to me.
I guess, but they used to rain on the thing. And it's sort of a nice celebratory arch. And it's
if a captain is retiring, or if a plane is retiring, or you know, there are all these occasions where
they have a lovely little water cannon salute. You wouldn't want to do it at the Shippell airport,
where it's sort of refilling the reservoir. There was a thing on Shippell airport website,
which was, it was like frequently asked questions and things you might have wondered about it said,
you may have noticed a plane on fire while you were taking off from Shippell,
which I would have thought would be so terrifying. And they need to make a bigger deal of this,
but apparently it's nothing to be scared of is what we call our firefly. And it's a plane,
which they regularly set on fire for the fire department. They claim it's used by the fire
department for training every day, which I can't believe they need to come every day to repractice
a plane being on fire. But there must be different crews from around the country. And how, I mean,
how many places in the country are going to have a every day though? It's a lot. It's a lot. It's
suggested not getting it right. Okay, we'll do this again tomorrow, guys. I see a load of clowns
with a chain of buckets going to the plane. Yeah. Skippal has, did you know this? It's
experimenting at the moment with guard pigs. Okay. Do you see this? Okay, guarding from what? Well,
exactly. Truffle. I don't want to create a bit of suspense. So last year, Skippal did this experiment
with installing pigs around the runways. Real pigs. Real pigs to scare away the geese. Okay. Or
in fact, not to scare away the geese, but to eat the food that the geese love to eat. Okay. Because
there is farming around and they grow sugar beet and geese love sugar beet. And so when they,
you know, land there, eat the beet, then they fly off, they might fly into the
entrance of a plane. That creates a big ol' problem. And so there's a place called the
beaten gawonga varkens, pigory, which translates as extraordinary pigs.
Did they give up for the final word?
We'll give up segment in our own language and just go to English. God, our language as well.
It's for pigory. Yeah, but they're a pigory which regularly hires out pigs for various purposes,
mostly to eat stuff which people want to eat. Because you never hear about pig strike
with planes, do you? You never do. No pigs don't fly. They don't famously. I've got some cool stuff
about airports which are neither Skippal or Heathrow. Would you like to hear a fact about
moss or golf? Golf? Absolutely. Moss, please. Yes. Wait, no, but you get a vote too.
Pittsburgh International Airport, they have a place called X-Bridge, which is an innovation
centre. And in there, they have a giant CMOS air purifier, which does all the air purification
in the whole airport. So what you're breathing, it holds 125 gallons of spirulina algae, which is
also known as CMOS. And this CMOS takes in the CO2 and it kind of works it through its body and then
sends out the oxygen. So you're breathing in, the moss has breathed it out, the CMOS has breathed
out. That's nice. That's awesome. Yeah, like having a Brita filter. That's wicked. Golf? The thing is,
you know that we have to ask about the golf now. It's a trick question, wasn't it? Yes. It was great.
So there's an airport called Don Muyang International in Bangkok. It used to be the main
airport in Bangkok until another one opened quite recently. But it has a full golf course between
two of its runways. So you're playing golf and there's planes literally taken off on your left
and on your right. You have to pass through security before you get to the golf course,
so you have to take all your clubs through the metal detectors and stuff like that.
Is there a golf test? As in I'm bad enough at golf that I can imagine myself accidentally,
you know, walloping of 747. Yeah. Hitting it out of the sky. How hard are you hitting that
ball there? I'm arguing. I don't think you would, if you've never played golf before, you wouldn't
be able to do that. So you have to be good enough to be able to hit it a long way, but bad enough
that you hit it in the wrong direction. But actually, one of the people who plays there said,
in theory, you could hit one of the aircraft, but it would have to be a very deliberate act.
Okay. Yeah. So you basically have to turn in a different direction that you're supposed to be
playing and just whack the ball at it. But then they also said the article I read that, you know,
a jet engine, it's kind of designed to hit geese and, you know, birds and stuff like that. So
little golf balls not going to hurt it anyway. Right. That'll just be crunched up. It's a
weight of effort, Andy, for you learning how to play golf really well. Moving to Bangkok.
Yeah. There's another airport near Heathrow called Northolt Airport. Northolt is a very
small airport. It's more like an aerodrome really. And they used to have a gasometer
in front of Northolt Airport right next to the runway. Gasometer is like a huge sort of cylinder
that keep natural gas in. There was also one right next to Heathrow. And people used to use
these things to guide their way into Heathrow Airport. And so one time in 1960, an airplane
who thought they were landing in Heathrow accidentally landed in Northolt. Okay. It's
only like a bus ride to get back to Heathrow. So they got off, the passengers got off, they
realized very clearly they were in the wrong place. So the passengers all got the bus back to Heathrow.
No problem. Okay. However, it's one thing landing a plane in Northolt Airport. Another
thing taking off because you need a certain length of runway in order to take off. And Northolt did
not have a long enough runway. So there was no way to get the aeroplane out of Northolt Airport.
Yeah. Did they drive it down Oxford Street? What happened? Well, what happened was a maintenance
team came along, they removed all of the seats, all of the carpet, anything in the cabin that
they could get rid of, pretty much all of the fuel apart from the tiny amount they needed to get
back to Heathrow and managed to make it just about light enough that it would be able to just
The calculations are extraordinary when it comes to that. Apparently the captain was immediately
fired by Panam once he got it back. I don't know if that's true, but probably not fair because it
happened two more times after that. So that was the first time it happened. And two times after
that, airplanes landed in Northolt when they should have landed in Heathrow. And in the end,
what they did was they started, they painted letters on these giant gas canisters.
Go away. The NH was painted on top of the one next to Northolt and LH was painted on the one
next to London Heathrow. Why? I know. Why put the H in both? It's so stupid, isn't it? They painted one
of them blue and the other one wasn't painted blue. It feels like you could have done more.
Do you know the airport that was the Heathrow before Heathrow?
Gallic. Croydon. Croydon, yeah. And Croydon Aerojome has quite a cool history. So it was the UK's
first international airport. It was 1920 until basically Heathrow became the big deal in 1946.
And it was like, that's really exciting. 1920. Passengers would just come for the sake of seeing
it. It had a five-star restaurant up the viewing tower so that people could sit and watch planes
take off. 1928 was the world's biggest airport. Good old Croydon. Is it still there in its shape?
It's obviously not an international airport. It was eventually decommissioned. I think it just
about went on until the '50s. But there used to be so many checks. If we think it's rough going
through security now, in the '20s, if you went to Croydon Airport, before you departed, you were
assessed by a customs officer, normal, and then you went to an exam hall. In your pants.
And you didn't know what any of the questions were going to be. And you were investigated by the
criminal investigation department, and then an immigration officer, and then a medical officer,
and then you were weighed. Wow. For the plane's distribution, of course. I've been weighed before
getting on a plane before. Yeah, small planes, I think. Yeah. Wasn't that where you were told
that you had some more different times? Have I ever said this on this? I'm not sure. But yeah,
I did get a plane once. Where was it? Maybe in Hawaii or somewhere, or somewhere like that. But
yeah, it was a very small plane, and they made me move to balance out the airplane. And I thought
that was a bit insulting, actually. It was only supermodels and children, wasn't it, on the rest of the plane.
Okay, it is time for fact number three, and that is James. Okay, my fact this week is that in the
16th century, hundreds of lives in Portugal were saved by a special sausage.
It must have been a very special sausage. So this is 16th century Portugal. The Spanish
Inquisition has been going on for a while in Spain, especially hence the name. I actually began in
Italy, but it has gotten to Portugal. And basically, if you're Jewish or Islamic, and you claim to be
a Catholic, but you're not really, then they're going to try and find you out, and they're going
to try and try you and try and burn you even. But one thing that would identify you as a heathen
would be a lack of sausages by your front door, because people used to hang their sausages to dry
out. And the sausages would often contain pork. And obviously, if you were Jewish, for instance,
then you wouldn't eat pork. So you would not have these sausages. So what can you do? Well,
you can get a decoy sausage. This is according to a book I was reading called Gastro Obscura.
And they wrote about this thing called the Alhira sausage. And it was made to look exactly like
one of these pork sausages, but it was actually made of chicken and bread. So it was a fake pork
sausage, and it saved people's lives because the Inquisition couldn't find them. Food-wise,
it must have been a very rough time because of these Islam and Judaism have very strict rules
about pork and shellfish and rabbits and other things. And so there would be some village feasts
in Spain and Portugal, where they would serve up paella, paella. And they would add mussels and pork,
and then they'd watch and see who said, "Oh, I don't want any paella. Thank you." And then those
people would be on the suspicious list for being inquisited. And it was very Jewish people who were
at the majority of the victims, really in the Spanish Inquisition, I think. Jewish people did
have to practice crypto-Judaism for a very long time, which was concealing. I know it sounds
more exciting than it was. They just bought everything with bit kind. So ahead of their time.
So yeah, because a lot of Jews had fled to Portugal from Spain when they thought the Spanish
Inquisition would just stick to its namesake, and then it came to Portugal. And so they did
things like they wrote Hebrew prayers, but in Catholic prayer books, and I think in, you know,
the Roman alphabet. And so people wouldn't know, they would observe their Black Passover and Yom Kippur,
but at slightly different days, so people wouldn't catch on. And yeah, they all hung these sausages.
And there was this amazing story that one community was found in Portugal in a little place called
Bel Monte in 1917, which had kept its faith completely secret since the 1490s. It's been
crypto-Jewish since then. That's like that Japanese soldier, isn't it, in the Second World War?
Well, that's all who kept fighting until 1975, I think it was. Heru, Heru, something, Anoda.
Because a lot of it was food related, it meant there was a high proportion of women who appeared
before the tribunal in the Spanish Inquisition, because of course they did a lot of the cooking.
And when you look at the wordings of people being tried, they're quite often active. So it's like,
you prepared this food, you lit these candles, you did this, whereas the men who were tried
were often like, you allowed yourself to eat this food. It was Eve's apple all over again.
It was a bit of that, I'm afraid. Well, I wonder as well with the Jewish tradition of, let's say,
children born to be Jewish, it's through the bloodline of the mother as well, isn't it? So I
guess they're more prime target as well. That's true. But a few other things, like basically
cooking a really big meal on a Friday was a surefire on you must be Jewish.
Because of the Sabbath. Because yeah, you weren't allowed to do it on the Sabbath. So even if you
just were hungry on a Friday. You were going on a long working week. I know. And also cooking with
olive oil. And the reason is that olive oil was a lot more expensive than like lard or pork fat.
But obviously Jewish people couldn't use the lard or couldn't use the pork fat, so they would use
olive oil. And that was supposedly a sign that they were to be tried. So many rules. Cuscus was
also a danger food. Seen as being more Islamic, you know, sort of North African grain. Cuscus.
If you, yeah, it was introduced by the Moors when it was all the Moorish.
If you refuse to eat a conga eel, trouble. Whenever you hear conga eel,
you do just think of it as a proverbial thing.
I'm refusing to eat a strangled bird. Okay. That was apparently a worrying sign or,
you know, a sign that you might be secretly Jewish, because apparently there are rules
against eating strangled birds. I see right. Specifically strangled.
Specifically strangled. Really, you could, it could be decapitated or boiled alive.
There's an old old QI fact, which is quite possibly one of my favorites, which is that
everybody expected the Spanish Inquisition. They were required to give you 30 days notice.
Was part of the 30 days notice the idea that there's a sort of printed menu of things that you
would be expected to, like how much did, how much did they help out people to, because as they say,
and I have to say, I don't know much about the Spanish Inquisition. And a lot of what I've read
to prepare for this fact has been really kind of like, they were actually really polite. And
yes, 5,000 people were killed overall, but actually they were dissolved in 1834,
which is an incredibly recent time for when I would think about when the Spanish Inquisition
was, but it was a period of hundreds of hundreds of years that they existed for 5,000 deaths over
400 years. It's still a lot. It's still a lot, absolutely. But it's not yet. The figures are
so disputed. Yeah, some people say that, you know, tens of thousands or hundreds of thousands.
Well, they would say they would, yeah, okay. Yeah, exactly. So it's really hard to know.
And then all the accounts are sort of saying what they didn't want to do was kill you. What
they really wanted to do was change your moral compass and make you more Catholic and make you
believe more like there's so much that then say they're really brutal. And then it's, yeah,
I mean, obviously forced, forced to conversion. And it was also forcing people to leave the country
if they refused to convert and things like this. So they used to have proper, they made a proper
big thing of it when they burned people, the Inquisition. They didn't sort of just sort of
keep it quiet. It wasn't just slip it onto the carpet. Don't want to make a big deal. Strange.
It was very attention seeking. It was the auto-defe ritual. And you, and this is when the
people who've been sentenced were paraded through town. And you'd go and look and you would book
a seat. It was announced a month beforehand. Who have you time to book your spot?
Everything was booked a month beforehand. Everything was like the Inquisition's arriving
a month beforehand. We're going to kill you a month beforehand. The people who were accused
didn't know until the morning, I don't think, what they'd been found guilty, what their sentence was.
So I think there were largely three kind of options and you had it revealed
by what you were wearing. So you'd be given clothes to wear that represented what was going
to happen to you. Were there sort of betting things on the side where people were trying to
guess, you know, prisoner number three? What's it going to come out in? Yeah. Hang on, are you
saying they give you, for example, a green cloak, but you don't know what the green cloak means
until they announce it? Or do you think, oh no, they give me the green cloak. That's a burning.
You know, once you've got the cloak. A yellow hat is an admonition or something.
They whip the cloak out. They walk into your cell and they say, oh, what have I got behind
my back? And then they whip the cloak out and then you know. So the first one is the Samara
and that's the worst one and it's amazing tunic and then you wear a very, very tall hat. Looks
like a dunce's hat. A little really stupid, actually. I like the ones they were in the festivals
in Spain. Yes, yes. Because they look a bit KKK. But they're not and that means you're being
burned alive at the stake. If it's got dragons and devils and flames on it and a picture of you
as well, they put a little picture of you on your tunic. That's a nice touch, isn't it? Yeah.
It's a bit personalised. Is that so that you can't like accidentally swap your tunic for someone else?
Maybe it is. Yeah. Well, I don't know how good the pictures were. Someone sewed this on at the
last minute. So that meant you were being burned alive at the stake. They had the Fuego Revolto,
which was flames pointed downwards and that was you didn't get burned at the stake. You got strangled
beforehand and then burned when you were dead. So that's much nicer. Okay. I think you've got
to be grateful. And then you had the San Benito, which was had some red salt tires on it and that
just meant you had to do some penance. So that's the one you're really holding out for. Red salt
tires. Look for the red salt tires. It's a big leap. Salt tires are like a cross, right? Yeah.
But that is a big difference between the second best and the first best,
doesn't it? It is. Yeah. You don't want them to be trying to choose between the two of them and
going, "Oh, I've got one of each left. I can't decide." Wow. I didn't know that. It's still kind
of going on. It's not the Spanish Inquisition. No. There was in 2015 Spain passed a law which was
related to the Spanish Inquisition, which I find amazing. And they passed a law saying that people
who were descended from Sephardic Jews, who were the people who lived in Spain and Portugal,
they could request Spanish nationality if they could prove certain things about their ancestry.
So, and this was a law of atonement, basically, for the expulsion of the Jews in the 15th century.
If you could prove a family connection with Medieval Spain, and if you were competent in Spanish
or Ladino, you could come back. There's loads of students. I've never heard of Ladino before.
It's the Judeo-Spanish language. It's an old Spanish language, and it's mostly spoken in Israel
these days. And it's called Ladino. I've never heard of it. So, this is your set for anyone
listening, your second route into getting an EU passport, right? If you don't have that Irish
connection that we're all trying to prove. Absolutely. Brush off your Ladino. If you're Jewish, then
you've got, yeah. And they had 127,000 people applied. Wow. Yeah. First task, 10 shots of
Sambuca, and then you're in. And I'll give you some other sausages that were in this book.
The Caccio Cavello della Migrente sounds like the most delicious thing in the world. So,
in the early 20th century, if you were an immigrant to America, you were allowed to bring
cheese in, but you weren't allowed to bring meat products. But a lot of the people coming from
Europe were big fans of salami and other cured meats. And so, they invented this thing where it was
salami hidden inside cheese. Oh. Crypto salami. Crypto salami. I practice crypto salami eating.
And another one. This is a Finnish sausage called Makara, M-A-K-A-R-A. And how do you think that's
cooked? It's an unusual way of cooking. Oh, Finland. They have a lot of saunas. You got it.
They have a special soapstone holder, which is like, it's like, it's basically a tube that you stick
your sausage in. Yeah. And then you put it on top of the coals in a sauna, and then it cooks it up.
How cool is that? The last thing you want, though, when you're sweltering in a 60-degree
sauna, you still want to go, all right, boiling hot sausage straight off the sauna coals. I think
that's so good, because you could run around outside with it in the snow. That would be nice.
What, branching your sausage? Absolutely. You plunge it into a snowdrift to cool it down.
And then get to it. That sounds like something from Carrie on Finland.
Okay, it is time for our final fact of the show, and that is Anna. My fact this week is that if you
count the number of lemmings at their peak somewhere, and then you go back four years later and you
count them again, there will be a thousand times fewer of them. Wow. A thousand times fewer. Yeah.
Well, that to me says that there's going to be a lot of lemmings in the first place. How many
lemmings? I can't even imagine a thousand lemmings. That's, wow, you can't even stretch that far.
You're a little imagination. A hundred is maximum, but that might be the video game.
That's a tenth of a lemming is left when you come back. You can't criticise James's imagination.
Last week, you couldn't imagine a draw big enough to fit a human skull. My imagination is too full
of lemmings to fit anything else. How many lemmings would you have in a group to match your percentage
here? No, any number of lemmings. So basically, it must be in the thousands. It's in the thousands.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. Well, when lemmings are at their peak, I guess they're going to, like,
lemming communities are going to peak way, way over a thousand. And then if you come back four
years after they've plummeted, exactly four years after that, there'll be a thousand times more
again. Okay. And they have this, these amazing population cycles, which some animals have,
but they just do it in a much more pronounced and extreme way than others. And also they're
proper mammals, right? They're actual, like sometimes you might have a load of flies that
you get loads of flies or loads of crickets or something at once, but like to have thousands
of mammals. Yeah, it's a lot. And to have it that regular literally every four years.
The cicadas of the Arctic. They are. Yes, indeed. And this was, we still don't really know why
this happens. There's, it's kind of the obvious two options of either they, when the lemming numbers
go up and up, then their predators numbers increase as well, because there are lots of lemmings to
eat. So eventually their predator numbers get so high that they're, they can eat all the lemmings,
or it's like the opposite thing where the lemmings, when there are hardly any of them,
they have loads to eat because they're hardly any of them. And so they eat loads, but as their
numbers go up and up, then they, they don't have as much food. So eventually they suddenly
starve to death. Or that they jump off cliffs. Or they hold themselves off cliffs. Let's get
into it. Sure. Right. Should we address the elephant in the room straight away? The lemming
on the cliff. The lemming on the cliff. Christ. Who wants to talk us through that then? Well,
that's the theory, isn't it, that lemmings would just follow each other off the cliffs.
A bit mass suicide. Yeah. Yeah. And it's, I believed it for a long time when I was a child.
Yeah. I think we all did. It is such a gruesome story. And it's, so the mass suicide lemming myth
from 1958, it's from the Disney film White Wilderness, which won a BAFTA, White, sorry, won an
Oscar for best documentary. And I think we'll all agree after this, it should be retracted.
And I'm afraid Jeff, the lemming isn't here to accept his award, but we've got,
oh, they're not here. Oh, not them. Oh, no. I love the idea of the, the anti Oscar awards,
where it's retracting. I think that's a really fun idea. How many for this year's retraction
of best actor include? That's a lot of people thinking Harvey Weinstein. I would like to
unthank you. You can unthank you if you like in your speech. So basically what I'm saying is that
Disney made this film called White Wilderness in 1958, which showed the lemmings, it showed hundreds
of thousands of lemmings, you know, crowding along and, and them jumping off cliffs to their doom,
which they were suddenly, were they migrating? They were trying to migrate. The idea was,
the ideas they're trying to migrate and they jump into the Arctic Ocean and they all die.
They don't know where they're going. And then they drown. And then the truth is that they had,
they put them on a, the Disney cinematographers have put them on a turntable.
Yeah, like a lazy Susan. Yeah, revolved them around for a bit and then throw them off the cliff.
And they revolved them around so it looked like there were loads more. This species of lemming
didn't even migrate. So they just have to pretend there were loads more. And the really horrible
thing is they bought them from some Inuit children. They basically took some pet hamsters
from some children and threw them off a cliff. And just threw them literally off a cliff. Yeah.
It's the least Disney, if you can think of the least Disney acts you could do, it's probably this.
After shooting Bambi's mum is this. Yeah. Yeah. And we believe that they never did that.
Haven't seen it, but I'm sure they definitely did that. But we believed it for years and years
and years and then suddenly till the 80s. Yeah. And there was a scat of the Canadian broadcasting
company didn't expose a on a 24 year old Disney film. It's so strange. They called it cruel camera.
It was about animal cruelty, basically. Yeah. In films. Yeah. So in the Disney film as well,
by the way, they use a species of lemming that you don't find where they were filming it. So it
was filmed in Alberta, Canada. It was in Calgary, but they presented that it was being filmed in
Lapland and the lemmings that they got for the filming, which they got North and the Arctic,
you don't find them in Lapland. So it's just a completely wrong species anyway, in the film.
Yeah. And the species they show, they don't migrate or anything like that. Do they?
So it's completely implausible. Yeah. And Calgary is nowhere near the Arctic circle,
case you're wondering. So well, it's, it's near in global terms. It's in the north and the
heavens. It's sadly quite far north. But yeah, you would not find them. But the other thing is
that people say that the myth comes from Disney and certainly that didn't hurt the myth. But the
myth existed well before that. Oh, did it? Yeah. So for a long time, people thought that lemmings
jumped off clips to kill themselves. And presumably because of these population cycles, they must
have thought that. Exactly. So there's a book called the Arthur Meese Children's Encyclopedia,
which was first published in 1908. And it mentions this myth there. And that was one of the most
popular kids books of the time. So it was a thing that people already knew, even though it's not
true. But then Disney really, really perpetuated that myth. That makes loads of sense because,
because otherwise, why would Disney have a kid? Yeah, yeah, yeah. So your director's out there,
he's going, why are they not running off the cliff? Let's make them do the thing that they
definitely do because we read it in a book. I don't know, I've been something of that, yeah.
There was a thing that I read that because lemmings can swim. And the problem is, is when they get
to, if they go under the water, I think their fur takes on too much water and they drown,
but they can swim if they don't go fully under. And so the ones that would drown would then later
on wash up to shore. And people would be like, what are they doing here? And that helped with
the myth as well, that maybe they jumped off a cliff. And that's why they're in the water at all.
Do you think there was a moment, I just, I'm trying to imagine being in that film crew,
there must have been 20, 30 people there all pushing thousands of lemmings off a cliff.
Like, well, not some of them are going, this is definitely a good idea.
Yeah, I probably shouldn't have signed up for this internship.
There was a, there was a bit of a metaculper from Disney when the expose film came out in 1982,
Roy, Roy Disney, or the son or the nephew of Walt Disney said, we may have lost a few lemmings.
We call him lemming Chucker Jr.
Just on them swimming and on them swimming in migratory terms, which they do. So this was
being considered even in the 19th century. So I was reading something from popular science
monthly in 1877. And I was a writer called W. Duppa Crotch.
Who was writing about it? W. Unclear, what is his first name? But his initial was W.
And then Duppa, D-U-P-P-A Crotch. Maybe he was called Willy.
It could be Willy Crotch. Willy Duppa Crotch.
And basically he was writing about, you know, the extraordinary swarms that you got.
And you know, they just, nothing stops them. Nothing stops this huge horde of lemmings as
they proceed. And that some years they were exorcised by the church and they were anti-lemming
prayers, allegedly. And Crotch wrote that sometimes so many lemmings took to sea to swim to new lands
that in 1868, a ship had sailed for 15 hours through a swarm of lemmings.
A swarm, hey! Wow! Just not as far as the eye can see.
Probably exaggerated. But he was trying to work out why they were doing this, you know.
Because it is true that populations of lemmings, some of them will strike out for a bit of new
land and they might get confused and drown. He reckoned, Crotch, this is, he said they maybe
were looking for a kind of lemming Atlantis. So that's somewhere which had sunk into the sea,
but had been a landmass that had food on it. And that they had... Oh, the memory has stayed.
...instinctual species memory. Amazing. And that they were looking for it and kept from like, you
know... Host's theory done, by the way. Host's theory. No, I know. And it's, yeah. But like, if,
if, you know, swallows fly to Africa for the winter... Yeah, no, that does happen.
If Africa sank, would they keep doing it? Would swallows keep going? What would they do?
Well, we spoke about monarch butterflies and they migrate over a lake. And for no reason at all,
they take a turn and then go around. And it's because supposedly a mountain used to exist there,
and it doesn't anymore, but in their path, genetically, that's been handed on, the map.
Crazy. How exciting. Lemming Atlantis. No, kill it. Kill the myth now. Before someone makes the film.
I'm on it already. Did you guys see that really incredible photo which was taken in 2014
in Canada in the Nunavut territory? And it was of a lemming... Yes, I saw hundreds of photos from
that specific time and place. Narrow it down. Go through your photos in your head. It was a snowy
owl nest. Oh, yeah. I didn't see this. This is insane. So it's basically a snowy owl nest that
is lined with over 70 dead lemmings. And it's extraordinary. Oh my god. And it's late. The
lemmings are laid around the nest all dead. So cozy. So cozy. It looks, Andy, not dissimilar to one of
the cakes that have been sent over. If you look down, it looks like a beautiful flower. Exactly.
It really does. Like a big furry flower with these eggs in the middle. I mean,
it's a astonishing pattern that they create around it. I mean, there's no planning to the
pattern. It's just dead lemmings laying down. You squashed enough dead lemmings together. It looks
quite neat because they're very tightly packed. And they've just got eyes bigger than their
stomachs. And it's like, obviously, a lemming bus period. And the owl is like, "Well, I love
eating lemming. I'm just going to pick up as many lemmings as I can and catch them." Presumably,
it insulates the nest. That's lovely and warm. So it's like a fur coat but that you can eat.
It's like a fur coat with meat in every pocket. But it doesn't look tight enough that the birds
would benefit from that to me when I saw the photo. It looks like it's just wringing around. It's like
if you had insulation in your house, but it was made of sausage rolls. The dream. Imagine piping
huge sausage rolls into your roof. Do you know where they live? Lemmings. In the clay. Up north,
yes. They live underground. They live... This is really cool. They have these tunnels. They have
these nests which are made of grass and feathers and ox wool, which I didn't know was a thing. I
guess of course it is. Discarded wool from an ox. But the young lemming pups, they grow up between
the ground and the snow. So there's the snow layer across everything. And there is this... Because
the ground radiates heat, it melts the snow directly above it. It's incredible. There's this
tiny gap and the lemmings live in that and it's called the subnivian space. I think it's so cool
that. It's mad. Incredible. There's this whole world. And this is where the adults live in like the
frozen winter period, isn't it? Running around in this secret world between the snow and the ground.
So how thick is the snow above that if you were a human walking across it? Is it so
packed tightly? It's quite thick and that's kind of the point because they don't hibernate. So when
it gets really, really cold, you think a lot of animals would kind of dig a little hole and hibernate,
but they don't have to because the snow is such a good insulator that like you say, it's warm enough
to melt that little layer and so they can live in there and run around and they're not frozen. That's
incredible. But I do... Maybe one of you guys did more research on this than me. What's the snow
resting on? Is it floating? It must be tunnels, right? So you would have an arch, which is where
they were. That makes more sense than my favorite. It's resting at two very precarious points.
That's how lemming Atlantis operated. Gravity had a different set of rules.
Okay, that's it. That is all of our facts. Thank you so much for listening. If you'd like to get
in contact with any of us about the things that we have said over the course of this podcast,
we can be found on our Twitter accounts. I'm on @Shrieberland, Andy, @AndrewHunterM, James,
@JamesHarkin and Anna, you can email our podcast at qi.com. Yep, or you can go to our group account,
which is @NoSuchThing or our website. NoSuchThing is a fish.com. All of our previous episodes are up
there. Do check them out. Also, have a little wander around the website. You'll find interesting
things like our new membership club, Club Fish. Very exciting place. It's an exclusive membership
area where you get access to all the extra bits of content that we've been making from episodes
where we discuss all your facts and all the letters that you've been sending in to us,
as well as fun little quizzes that have been devised by James Harkin, things like that. It's
really fun. Do check it out. Otherwise, just come back here because we're going to be back
with another episode next week and we'll see you then. Goodbye.